---
slug: frc-nix
title: "NixOS for FRC Coprocessors"
published: 2024-04-17
updated: 2024-05-02
---

## Motivation

Year after year, the state of _FIRST_ Robotics software has increased in
sophistication, from the adoption of AprilTag pose estimation to the
increased prevalence of on-the-fly trajectory generation and
pathfinding.

This increase in sophistication has been accompanied by an increase in
computation resource requirements -- far beyond what the aging RoboRIO
2 platform can provide. This has led to an explosion in the number of
coprocessors on FRC robots. It's not unusual to see a robot with half a
dozen coprocessors handling various concerns.

Managing networks of coprocessors is difficult under any circumstances,
but FRC presents a few additional challenges:

1.  Coprocessors have **no Internet connectivity** while on a robot
    network.

2.  Violent actuations and collisions with robots have the potential to
    inflict **physical damage** on coprocessor hardware.

3.  The densely-packed nature of many FRC robots often make it
    **physically difficult to access** coprocessors, particularly in the
    short times between competition matches.

4.  During competitions it is necessary to perform maintenance without
    advance warning and under extreme **time constraints**.

Because of the difficulty of physical access, the wide class of issues
that disable coprocessors' SSH servers become very time-consuming to
resolve.

Even with shell access, the lack of Internet connectivity often hinders
maintenance by making it extremely difficult to install, update, or
repair software. Furthermore, there is often a lack of _any_ Internet
connection to coprocessors during competitions, due to the difficulty of
creating an Internet-connected Ethernet network in a pit.[^1]

All of these challenges are, of course, further exacerbated by the
stressful, time-constrained nature of FRC competitions.

We propose that [NixOS](https://nixos.org/), an immutable Linux
distribution built on the principles of pure functional programming,
can, in many cases, address and mitigate these issues significantly
better than traditional Linux distributions such as Debian.

## Declarative Deployments

Today, coprocessors in FRC are virtually always configured
_imperatively_. Teams first install an operating system on their
coprocessors using a monitor and peripherals, then they set up login
credentials, SSH keys, etc. Finally, they install FRC-specific software
such as a camera server or pathfinding offloading service. Team-specific
software is most often installed and updated from source by copying from
a local machine and then building on the coprocessor. This process is
then manually repeated for each coprocessor.

This is not, however, the only way to deploy software. Tools such as
[Puppet](https://www.puppet.com/),
[Chef](https://github.com/chef/chef), and
[Terraform](https://www.terraform.io/) popularized _declarative_
configuration and deployment. Rather than manually running commands to
configure the system and deploy to it, the administrator _declares_ the
software they want on the system and the configuration they want it to
have and the system is automatically driven to that state.

The declarative system administration paradigm has numerous advantages:
among other things,

- many systems can be managed together, and common configuration
  shared between them;

- it doesn't matter what state the system is currently in (brand-new
  install, partially broken, etc.), deploying to it once will bring it
  to the desired state; and

- declarations can serve as documentation of how systems are
  configured, eliminating the need to dig through `/etc`.

## NixOS

NixOS is one of the most powerful declarative deployment tools in
existence. It uses [Nix](https://nixos.org/guides/how-nix-works), a
purely functional build system and package manager, to achieve
_reproducible_ and _immutable_ deployments of entire Linux systems.
Although this method has drawbacks, it also has many benefits.

First, by mounting most parts of the system read-only and creating new
bootloader configurations for each deployed system configuration, NixOS
achieves incredible resilience. Accidental misconfigurations can be
rolled back by selecting the previous configuration during boot, and
nothing short of erasing the root or EFI filesystem will permanently
break a NixOS system. This means **teams don't need to worry about their
troubleshooting steps (or software) breaking anything**.

Second, NixOS systems are _stateless_. Although Puppet, Chef, Terraform,
et. al. attempt to hide the effects of state, traditional Linux
distributions are essentially stateful and these tools cannot fully
reset a system to a declared configuration. However, with NixOS, **teams
get what they declare, nothing more, nothing less**. It is impossible
to, for example, forget that some crucial setting was set imperatively
and that the coprocessor won't work if you redeploy from a scratch
install.

Third, NixOS can generate pre-configured SD card images, USB installer
images, virtual machine images, Docker containers, and more from system
configurations. If a coprocessor breaks, its entire state can be rebuilt
from a NixOS configuration and flashed straight to an SD card. With
NixOS, **provisioning a new coprocessor takes minutes, not hours**.
Furthermore, the ability to generate VM images which behave exactly like
physical coprocessors opens up the possibility to **faithfully simulate
coprocessors on a developer machine**.

Fourth, there exists a rich ecosystem of packages and deployment tools
for NixOS. Nixpkgs, NixOS's package repository, is the most
comprehensive package repository in existence, [^2] and NixOS comes
built-in with tens of thousands of configuration options. Team 3636 has
packaged a large variety of FRC software for Nix and NixOS, which
**makes installing FRC software as easy as adding a line to a
configuration file**.

```nix
# install and daemonize PhotonVision on a NixOS system
services.photonvision.enable = true;
```

Similarly, NixOS-based deployment tools like
[NixOps](https://github.com/NixOS/nixops) and
[Colmena](https://github.com/zhaofengli/colmena) simplify and automate
the process of deploying to large numbers of coprocessors. They also
make it easy to build the system configurations on an Internet-connected
machine and then deploy later, mitigating the lack of Internet
connection on coprocessors and allowing teams to **update and install
software on coprocessors without ever disconnecting them from the robot
network**.

## A NixOS Distribution for FRC

FRC teams use a lot of specialty software (WPILib, PathPlanner, Choreo,
PhotonVision, etc.), which isn't available in most distributions. For
NixOS, we've worked to package a large selection of FRC software and
upstream it into Nixpkgs. In the meantime, we're maintaining these
packages in [an FRC-specific package
repository](https://github.com/FRC3636/frc-nix).

Currently, we support the following software on Linux and Darwin
platforms with 64-bit x86 or ARM architectures:

- PhotonVision (upstream in NixOS)
- AdvantageScope
- Choreo
- PathPlanner
- Every WPILib tool (Glass, Shuffleboard, SysID, etc.)

The distribution also contains tools for configuring networking settings
for typical FRC use, generating installer ISOs, commonly-used
administration tools, and more.

[^1]:
    Typically, cellular connections to mobile phones are the only
    available Internet connections, and few FRC teams have the time and
    expertise to use this as an uplink for a correctly-configured copper
    Ethernet network. Making this easier is a possible subject of future
    work.

[^2]:
    As of writing, according to [Repology's
    statistics.](https://repology.org/repositories/statistics/newest)
